you hear about it in the news it
dominates conversation among certain
circles and it seems the whole world
revolves around it
yep I'm talking about oil and not the
cooking kind so have you ever wondered
what would happen if we ran out of this
crucial resource it's no pretty picture
trust me but let me explain why I call
it crucial in the first place most
people don't realize the real importance
of oil every year the US alone uses a
whopping 7.3 billion barrels worth of
oil products if you do the math that's
around 20 million barrels a day and if
you believe that all this oil is used to
fuel your car and warm up your house
think again you might be surprised to
find out how many everyday objects
wouldn't exist if there was no oil for
example every time you blow bubbles with
your chewing gum you should be grateful
there's oil on this planet you heard me
right the very flavory thing you toss
into your mouth contains petroleum in
fact that's where it's chewiness and
softness comes from then there are all
kinds of sports equipment
let's see oil is used to make
basketballs footballs golf balls and
golf bags skis soccer balls cleats
tennis rackets okay I think you get the
picture here and what about your
grandpappy's dentures yes modern
varieties use certain carbon-based dies
for pigmentation and these dyes are
produced with the use of petroleum oil
and different vegetable resources but
don't worry that dyes are FDA approved
and actually similar to the food
colorants you probably have in your
kitchen right now well that's reassuring
or not you also smear oil on your face
Wow weird oh I'm kidding but if you use
lipstick guys you should know that a lot
of them contain petroleum in the form of
paraffin wax it makes lipstick hold its
shape and helps you apply this beauty
products smoothly now do you play the
guitar then you use petroleum regularly
kinds of modern guitar strings are made
from nylon and nylon in turn is made
from say it with me
petroleum great job and I bet you used
toothpaste everyday too even twice a day
if you're diligent yep the same story
here the colorants that make your
toothpaste so pretty also contain
petroleum perfumes and deodorants
contact lenses fishing lures
you're literally surrounded by common
objects made from oil but the most
significant things produced with the
help of oil are cars kitchen appliances
furniture and clothing okay you get it
so what about the question at hand what
would happen to the world if one day all
the oil on the planet ran out well you
wouldn't notice any problems at first
normally most countries have special
reserves with enough oil to keep things
running for at least a couple of months
but imagine that this plan be failed and
people didn't have access to these oil
reserves how long could we hold on you
can safely assume that from day one oil
and gas prices would literally skyrocket
there they go people would be willing to
pay any amount to fill their vehicles
with the last remaining drops of
gasoline after several weeks if not days
all private transport would stop running
drivers who normally commute long
distances would have problems getting to
work public transportation like trains
buses and planes would become useless as
well as a result millions of people
would lose their jobs and a lot of
companies would have to look for new
employees unfortunately they likely fail
to find highly qualified specialists on
such short notice
emergency services would keep running
for some time but pretty soon they'd
falter - one of the worst risks about
the absence of oil would be health risks
for tons of hospital patients the truth
is that medicine relies on oil probably
a bit too much nowadays must-have items
like syringes gloves sterile packaging
as well as serious high-tech equipment
such as MRI scanners computers and CT
scanners are all produced using oil
Plus as you remember there'd be no
transport to deliver necessary
medications from manufacturers to
pharmacies another serious problem would
be connected with food supply especially
in big cities most of them rely on food
imported from rural areas and look at
what would happen there'd be no
transport to collect food from
production sites and bring it to grocery
stores that's why many city dwellers
would move to the countryside and try to
grow food for themselves who even if I
tried I don't know if I'd be able to do
it do you think you could grow your own
food and sustain yourself let me know
down below anyway after that initial
rough patch the situation would likely
calm down and people would start to
adapt but however well they work
together life would still never be the
same there wouldn't be as much food
variety as we enjoy now you'd have to do
without chocolate pizza and other
blessings of civilization but hey you
might finally lose some of that winter
weight in the northern regions people
would start chopping down forests to get
at least some source of energy and not
freeze in the winter this would lead to
severe deforestation and the planet
would suffer as much as its people yikes
doom and gloom all around but let's talk
about the bright side already because
that's what we do here oil is a serious
source of pollution and in the US alone
more than 9 million gallons of this
stuff have spilled from pipeline since
2010 and if you consider the fact that
this number means 1300 oil spills it's
easy to calculate that this problem
occurs almost every other day this
spilled oil pollutes croplands
contaminates water and severely harms
the environment and wildlife on top of
that when people produce energy from oil
this process puts out sulfur dioxide and
carbon monoxide these gases are
hazardous to your health
especially in large regular doses
so with the absence of oil you as well
as the environment are likely to become
a bit healthier on the other hand it
depends on which kind of alternative
energy people would choose to use
instead of oil let's have a look at our
options
there's always nuclear power in fact
nuclear power reactors are already
pretty common in a lot of countries for
example there are currently 98 of them
in the US and these power stations
produce 20% of the country's electricity
other nations rely on nuclear energy
even more France for instance generates
80% of its electricity with the help of
nuclear power on the one hand the very
idea of a nuclear power station makes
people worry about their safety on the
other hand though nuclear energy is much
cheaper and more efficient than other
sources like wind hydro power and solar
energy also according to NASA nuclear
energy is one of the least harmful to
the environment
there's also wind and solar power the
supporters of using these alternatives
are sure that they don't have any
adverse effects on the environment
unfortunately they aren't 100% right
according to the Institute for energy
research modern wind and solar energy
plants can't work without a constant
backup it kicks into action when the Sun
is covered by clouds or the wind isn't
strong enough
such backup energy sources include let's
say energy coming from the nearest coal
plant in any case even if all the oil
ran out one day the world wouldn't come
to a screeching halt people would
definitely figure out some way to deal
with this problem like finding and
developing new energy sources or simply
changing their lifestyle that's what's
cool about the human race we can adapt
to almost anything but one thing's for
sure nothing would remain the same and
the world would be an entirely different
place so do you think running out of oil
would cause a global disaster let me
know your thoughts down in the comments
remember to give this video a like share
it with your friends and click subscribe
to stay on the bright side of life
[Music]